lib/elixir/pages/Typespecs.md, before:

# Typespecs

Elixir comes with a notation for declaring types and specifications. Elixir is dynamically typed, and as such, typespecs are never used by the compiler to optimize or modify code. Still, using typespecs is useful as documentation and tools such as [Dialyzer](http://www.erlang.org/doc/man/dialyzer.html) can analyze code with typespecs to find bugs.

The attributes `@type`, `@opaque`, `@typep`, `@spec`, `@callback` and `@macrocallback` are the main mechanism for defining typespecs. See sub-sections "Defining a type" and "Defining a specification" below.

## Types and their syntax

The type syntax provided by Elixir is fairly similar to [the one in Erlang](http://www.erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/typespec.html).

Most of the built-in types provided in Erlang (for example, `pid()`) are expressed the same way: `pid()` or simply `pid`. Parameterized types are also supported (`list(integer)`) and so are remote types (`Enum.t`).

Integers and atom literals are allowed as types (ex. `1`, `:atom` or `false`). All other types are built of unions of predefined types. Certain shorthands are allowed, such as `[...]`, `<<>>` and `{...}`.

### Basic types

    type :: any()                   # the top type, the set of all terms
          | none()                  # the bottom type, contains no terms
          | pid()
          | port()
          | reference()
          | tuple()
          | atom()
          | integer()
          | non_neg_integer()       # 0, 1, 2, 3, ...
          | pos_integer()           # 1, 2, 3, ...
          | neg_integer()           # ..., -3, -2, -1
          | float()
          | map()
          | struct()
          | list(type)
          | nonempty_list(type)
          | improper_list(type1, type2)
          | maybe_improper_list(type1, type2)
          | Literals                # Described in section "Literals"
          | Builtin                 # Described in section "Builtin-types"
          | Remotes                 # Described in section "Remotes"

### Literals

The following literals are also supported in typespecs:

    type :: :atom                         ## Atoms
          | 1                             ## Integers
          | 1..10                         ## Integers from 1 to 10
          | 1.0                           ## Floats

          | <<>>                          ## Bitstrings
          | <<_::size>>                 # size is 0 or a positive integer
          | <<_::_ * unit>>             # unit is an integer from 1 to 256
          | <<_::size * unit>>

          | [type]                        ## Lists
          | []                            # empty list
          | [...]                         # shorthand for nonempty_list(any())
          | [type, ...]                   # shorthand for nonempty_list(type)
          | [key: type]                   # keyword lists

          | (... -> type)                 ## Functions
          | (... -> type)                 # any arity, returns type
          | (() -> type)                  # 0-arity, returns type
          | (type1, type2 -> type)        # 2-arity, returns type

          | %{}                           ## Maps
          | %{key: type}                  # map with key :key with value of type
          | %{type1 => type2}             # map with keys of type1 with values of type2
          | %SomeStruct{}
          | %SomeStruct{key: type}

          | {}                            ## Tuples
          | {:ok, type}                   # two element tuple with an atom and any type

### Built-in types

These types are also provided by Elixir as shortcuts on top of the basic and literal types.

Built-in type           | Defined as
:---------------------- | :---------
`term()`                | `any()`
`binary()`              | `<<_::_ * 8>>`
`bitstring()`           | `<<_::_ * 1>>`
`boolean()`             | `false` \| `true`
`byte()`                | `0..255`
`char()`                | `0..0x10ffff`
`number()`              | `integer()` \| `float()`
`charlist()`            | `[char()]`
`list()`                | `[any()]`
`maybe_improper_list()` | `maybe_improper_list(any(), any())`
`nonempty_list()`       | `nonempty_list(any())`
`iolist()`              | `maybe_improper_list(byte() \| binary() \| iolist(), binary() \| [])`
`iodata()`              | `iolist()` \| `binary()`
`module()`              | `atom()` \| `tuple()`
`arity()`               | `0..255`
`mfa()`                 | `{atom(), atom(), arity()}`
`identifier()`          | `pid()` \| `port()` \| `reference()`
`node()`                | `atom()`
`timeout()`             | `:infinity` \| `non_neg_integer()`
`no_return()`           | `none()`
`fun()`                 | `(... -> any)`
`struct()`              | `%{__struct__: atom()}`
`as_boolean(t)`         | `t`
`keyword()`             | `[{atom(), any()}]`
`keyword(t)`            | `[{atom(), t}]`

### Remote types

Any module is also able to define its own type and the modules in Elixir are no exception. For example, a string is `String.t`, a range is `Range.t`, any enumerable can be `Enum.t` and so on.

## Defining a type

    @type type_name :: type
    @typep type_name :: type
    @opaque type_name :: type

A type defined with `@typep` is private. An opaque type, defined with `@opaque` is a type where the internal structure of the type will not be visible, but the type is still public.

Types can be parameterized by defining variables as parameters, these variables can then be used to define the type.

    @type dict(key, value) :: [{key, value}]

## Defining a specification

    @spec function_name(type1, type2) :: return_type
    @callback function_name(type1, type2) :: return_type
    @macrocallback macro_name(type1, type2) :: Macro.t

Callbacks are used to define the callbacks functions of behaviours (see `Behaviour`).

Guards can be used to restrict type variables given as arguments to the function.

    @spec function(arg) :: [arg] when arg: atom

Type variables with no restriction can also be defined.

    @spec function(arg) :: [arg] when arg: var

You can also name your arguments in a typespec using `arg_name :: arg_type` syntax.
This is particularly useful as a way to differentiate multiple arguments
of the same type (or multiple elements of the same type in a type def):

    @spec days_since_epoch(year :: integer, month :: integer, day :: integer) :: integer
    @type color :: {red :: integer, green :: integer, blue :: integer}

Specifications can be overloaded just like ordinary functions.

    @spec function(integer) :: atom
    @spec function(atom)    :: integer

## Notes

Elixir discourages the use of type `string` as it might be confused with binaries which are referred to as "strings" in Elixir (as opposed to character lists). In order to use the type that is called `string` in Erlang, one has to use the `charlist` type which is a synonym for `string`. If you use `string`, you'll get a warning from the compiler.

If you want to refer to the "string" type (the one operated on by functions in the `String` module), use `String.t` type instead.

In map and struct type declarations such as `%{key: value}` or `%Struct{key: value}`, the key-value pair type information is not used by the current version of dialyzer.

Commit message:

Add support for OTP 19 map typespecs
  * %{required(foo) => bar} and %{optional(foo) => bar} forms are added
  * %{foo => bar} is deprecated in favor of the above forms
  * %{...} is added to mean any map
  * %{} now means empty map

lib/elixir/pages/Typespecs.md, after:

# Typespecs

Elixir comes with a notation for declaring types and specifications. Elixir is dynamically typed, and as such, typespecs are never used by the compiler to optimize or modify code. Still, using typespecs is useful as documentation and tools such as [Dialyzer](http://www.erlang.org/doc/man/dialyzer.html) can analyze code with typespecs to find bugs.

The attributes `@type`, `@opaque`, `@typep`, `@spec`, `@callback` and `@macrocallback` are the main mechanism for defining typespecs. See sub-sections "Defining a type" and "Defining a specification" below.

## Types and their syntax

The type syntax provided by Elixir is fairly similar to [the one in Erlang](http://www.erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/typespec.html).

Most of the built-in types provided in Erlang (for example, `pid()`) are expressed the same way: `pid()` or simply `pid`. Parameterized types are also supported (`list(integer)`) and so are remote types (`Enum.t`).

Integers and atom literals are allowed as types (ex. `1`, `:atom` or `false`). All other types are built of unions of predefined types. Certain shorthands are allowed, such as `[...]`, `<<>>` and `{...}`.

### Basic types

    type :: any()                   # the top type, the set of all terms
          | none()                  # the bottom type, contains no terms
          | pid()
          | port()
          | reference()
          | tuple()
          | atom()
          | integer()
          | non_neg_integer()       # 0, 1, 2, 3, ...
          | pos_integer()           # 1, 2, 3, ...
          | neg_integer()           # ..., -3, -2, -1
          | float()
          | map()                   # any map
          | struct()                # any struct
          | list(type)
          | nonempty_list(type)
          | improper_list(type1, type2)
          | maybe_improper_list(type1, type2)
          | Literals                # Described in section "Literals"
          | Builtin                 # Described in section "Builtin-types"
          | Remotes                 # Described in section "Remotes"

### Literals

The following literals are also supported in typespecs:

    type :: :atom                         ## Atoms
          | 1                             ## Integers
          | 1..10                         ## Integers from 1 to 10
          | 1.0                           ## Floats

                                          ## Bitstrings
          | <<>>                          # empty bitstring
          | <<_::size>>                   # size is 0 or a positive integer
          | <<_::_ * unit>>               # unit is an integer from 1 to 256
          | <<_::size * unit>>

                                          ## Lists
          | [type]                        # list with any number of type elements
          | []                            # empty list
          | [...]                         # shorthand for nonempty_list(any())
          | [type, ...]                   # shorthand for nonempty_list(type)
          | [key: type]                   # keyword lists

                                          ## Functions
          | (... -> type)                 # any arity, returns type
          | (() -> type)                  # 0-arity, returns type
          | (type1, type2 -> type)        # 2-arity, returns type

                                          ## Maps
          | %{}                           # empty map
          | %{...}                        # any map
          | %{key: type}                  # map with required key :key with value of type
          | %{required(type1) => type2}   # map with required keys of type1 with values of type2
          | %{optional(type1) => type2}   # map with optional keys of type1 with values of type2
          | %SomeStruct{}                 # struct with all fields of any type
          | %SomeStruct{key: type}        # struct with :key field of type

                                          ## Tuples
          | {}                            # empty tuple
          | {:ok, type}                   # two element tuple with an atom and any type

### Built-in types

These types are also provided by Elixir as shortcuts on top of the basic and literal types.

Built-in type           | Defined as
:---------------------- | :---------
`term()`                | `any()`
`binary()`              | `<<_::_ * 8>>`
`bitstring()`           | `<<_::_ * 1>>`
`boolean()`             | `false` \| `true`
`byte()`                | `0..255`
`char()`                | `0..0x10ffff`
`number()`              | `integer()` \| `float()`
`charlist()`            | `[char()]`
`list()`                | `[any()]`
`maybe_improper_list()` | `maybe_improper_list(any(), any())`
`nonempty_list()`       | `nonempty_list(any())`
`iolist()`              | `maybe_improper_list(byte() \| binary() \| iolist(), binary() \| [])`
`iodata()`              | `iolist()` \| `binary()`
`module()`              | `atom()` \| `tuple()`
`arity()`               | `0..255`
`mfa()`                 | `{atom(), atom(), arity()}`
`identifier()`          | `pid()` \| `port()` \| `reference()`
`node()`                | `atom()`
`timeout()`             | `:infinity` \| `non_neg_integer()`
`no_return()`           | `none()`
`fun()`                 | `(... -> any)`
`struct()`              | `%{__struct__: atom()}`
`as_boolean(t)`         | `t`
`keyword()`             | `[{atom(), any()}]`
`keyword(t)`            | `[{atom(), t}]`

### Remote types

Any module is also able to define its own type and the modules in Elixir are no exception. For example, a string is `String.t`, a range is `Range.t`, any enumerable can be `Enum.t` and so on.

### Maps

The key types in maps are allowed to overlap, and if they do, the leftmost key takes precedence. A map value does not belong to this type if it contains a key that is not in the maps allowed keys.

Because it is common to end a map type with `optional(any) => any` to denote that keys that do not belong to any other key in the map type are allowed, and may map to any value, the shorthand notation `...` is allowed as the last element of a map type.

Notice that the syntactic representation of `map()` is `%{...}` (or `%{optional(any) => any}`), not `%{}`. The notation `%{}` specifies the singleton type for the empty map.

## Defining a type

    @type type_name :: type
    @typep type_name :: type
    @opaque type_name :: type

A type defined with `@typep` is private. An opaque type, defined with `@opaque` is a type where the internal structure of the type will not be visible, but the type is still public.

Types can be parameterized by defining variables as parameters, these variables can then be used to define the type.

    @type dict(key, value) :: [{key, value}]

## Defining a specification

    @spec function_name(type1, type2) :: return_type
    @callback function_name(type1, type2) :: return_type
    @macrocallback macro_name(type1, type2) :: Macro.t

Callbacks are used to define the callbacks functions of behaviours (see `Behaviour`).

Guards can be used to restrict type variables given as arguments to the function.

    @spec function(arg) :: [arg] when arg: atom

Type variables with no restriction can also be defined.

    @spec function(arg) :: [arg] when arg: var

You can also name your arguments in a typespec using `arg_name :: arg_type` syntax.
This is particularly useful as a way to differentiate multiple arguments
of the same type (or multiple elements of the same type in a type def):

    @spec days_since_epoch(year :: integer, month :: integer, day :: integer) :: integer
    @type color :: {red :: integer, green :: integer, blue :: integer}

Specifications can be overloaded just like ordinary functions.

    @spec function(integer) :: atom
    @spec function(atom)    :: integer

## Notes

Elixir discourages the use of type `string` as it might be confused with binaries which are referred to as "strings" in Elixir (as opposed to character lists). In order to use the type that is called `string` in Erlang, one has to use the `charlist` type which is a synonym for `string`. If you use `string`, you'll get a warning from the compiler.

If you want to refer to the "string" type (the one operated on by functions in the `String` module), use `String.t` type instead.
